so let's continue with a lesson that we
will began some time ago this is about
still a radiation and Stella types so
here we've got all the stars from the
smallest through to the biggest and
hottest it's actually more than this OB
a f g/km scheme but we're just going to
stick with this with this for now
because that's all the IB requires what
you do need to know is that in between
the O and the B there are stars namely
oh one oh two oh three oh four oh five
all the way up to oh nine and there's B
1 B 2 B 3 B 4 all the way up to b9
actually it starts at b0 b1 b2 and so on
and anyway there's colder stars than em
but we're not gonna worry about but the
stars that are cold of em we might not
even get to actually this list of stars
today we'll see how we go I'm just gonna
talk to you for about 25 minutes or so
we also mentioned last time that there's
something called the PP chain and the pH
and it's a way that stars generate
energy by fusing protons that's the P
and the P P into helium and so helium
nucleus has two protons and two neutrons
so we'll talk about that in more detail
soon as well and these are the things
we're going to try and explain today
using some physics namely how clouds of
gas which by which we mean hydrogen and
helium condense down into things which
are able to fuse which we call stars so
iCloud that is not fusing it's not a
star a cloud that is fusing is a star so
there's a difference well actually you
can have something in between a cloud
and a star and that might be something
like a planet Jupiter and so it is a
sphere or gas the center of which is hot
but not hot enough for fusion to take
place so what happens when a star is
born well All Stars start life as a
nebula of gas and dust and remember what
I said about gas hydrogen helium what
has dust everything else
okay so over millions of years gravity
pulls these closer together now where
these clouds of gas where these nebulae
come from here's one of two places
number one they were just there at the
beginning of the universe the universe
exploded in a Big Bang and so we had
hydrogen and helium in roughly the
proportions of 74 percent to about 25
percent hydrogen helium and there was a
tiny little bit of other stuff but
basically not nothing nothing heavier
than lithium really and over more about
the next few maybe 1 billion years or so
we had the first stars being born once
that first generation of stars were born
and then died the explosions released
lots and lots of gas into the universe
and so some of those some of the
remnants some of the leftover stuff from
from those exploded stars they turned
into nebulae as well and then you have a
second generation of stars and so stars
that explode leave behind they're
basically spewed up gaps throughout the
universe and it's those things that can
be then condensed into new stars and so
you have second-generation stars
third-generation stars and so on the the
older stars really are third-generation
stars we'll talk about that again some
other times well so the birth of a star
here's basically what happens you have
you've been clouded gas gravity pulls
inwards on the big cloud of gas and it
causes the cloud of gas to contract
towards the center and as a cloud of gas
copies compressed the laws of
thermodynamics tell us that the
temperature goes up
okay so pressure builds up and the core
starts to heat up giving out infrared
radiation so you've just got this force
inwards of gravity a star is born
essentially when fusion begins so you
have this spherical object before fusion
begins that astronomers give a special
name called a protostar now a protostar
isn't something that
fusion is taking place in but nor is it
a thing where fusion will never take
place so for example something like
Jupiter is not a proto style it's a
planet but it doesn't matter how long
you wait doing it although it's hot in
the center
Jupiter is not going to have fusion
starting in the center of it it's just
not big enough so for a protester the
dust and gas from the nebula is added to
the protests are it gains mass as masses
gained gravity increases in the
temperature within the protostar
increases so it's a sort of a simple
process gravity causes the thing to
collapse the temperature heats up in the
center the temperature heats up to a
point where you get well basically
ignition occurring and the ignition is
the point where the star is born so the
gravity eventually gets so big and the
temperature gets so high that nuclear
fusion starts it becomes a star life of
a star let's see what happens there's a
nice picture of the Sun I star it in a
state called hydrostatic equilibrium and
in hydrostatic equilibrium you have a
balance of two forces within a fluid so
we can call the roiling hot mass of
spherical plasma that is a star a fluid
okay roughly speaking the fluids are
basically liquids and gases and for all
intents and purposes stars are gases
sometimes we give them fancy names like
old - plasma states but basically a gas
the mass of the star has lots of gravity
the gravity is pushing in but at the
same time there is an equal and opposite
force pushing out from the center and we
give that a name and that's called the
radiation pressure and what's going on
is right in the center fusion reactions
are like lots and lots of hydrogen bombs
going off and they're exploding in the
center there and causing huge amounts of
energy and the energy is flying outwards
from the center of the star in the form
of radiation and also in the form of
particles and so you have this balance
this lovely little balance in a normal
star or what we are going to start
calling a main-sequence star a
main-sequence star is where you have
hydrostatic equilibrium and the burning
of hydrogen the force of the radiation
pressure from nuclear fusion is balanced
the gravitational force in a stable star
so nuclear fusion essentially for now
there are many many variations on this
kind of reaction but here's the most
important one it's from that PP chain
which says that if you take four
hydrogen's then you can create a helium
and that puts out some energy as well
and that's the secret behind well some
good 90% of stars that are up there in
the night sky the death of the star
stars don't last forever they burn fuel
and then eventually they exhaust all of
their fuel and a number of things can
happen that we've already seen so there
are two ways that are stark and start
off you can start off small like our Sun
or I can start off big like this star
over here there are all different sizes
now if we're gonna actually concede our
big stars at the beginning of their life
they're probably going to be blue doctor
red see how big a red giant star is that
are compared to something like the Sun
and something like the earth a red giant
is kind of inconceivably large just
think about how big the earth seems to
you right now so a red giant eventually
a star becomes the size of our Sun
becomes a red giant and why because it's
ran out of fuel in the center once it
runs out of fuel in the center then it
collapses because there's no longer any
radiation pressure outwards because
there's no radiation pressure outwards
these star collapses under gravity and
that can ignite a new sort of fusion
which is called hydrogen burning and
long story short the hydrogen burning
occurs at a temperature about 10 times
that of sorry the helium burning occurs
at a temperature of around 10 times that
of hydrogen burning and so the entire
thing expands until it's huge but
eventually even that fuel source runs
out and the whole thing collapses like
we can see here until it turns into a
white dwarf and a white dwarf is a star
in inverted commas because in scare
quotes because it's not really a star
gives the definition of the star is an
object where a fusion is occurring but
in a white dwarf you're no longer
getting fusion instead what you've got
the hot ashes left over from a burning
fire
no new combustion taking place the thing
is just cooling down so what dwarf
eventually cools down to become a black
dwarf wandering through the universe
cold and alone for the rest of its
existence in the existence of the
universe so far as we know next largest
star so stars bigger than the Sun this
is a bad choice of color that star
should have begun as a white star not as
a red star but oh well mistakes happen
okay so this hot white or maybe even
blue star once it runs out of hydrogen
then it collapses and it starts to burn
helium gets bigger but eventually the
helium runs out and in fact what happens
is the helium turns into carbon then the
carbon runs out the carbon can create
fire a complex series of reactions we
don't need to learn about in the ID I
had to sit through it in university
lectures but basically the carbon turns
into nitrogen turns into oxygen turns
into phosphorus turns into silicon and
so on up the periodic table and each
time it goes through a new cycle of
creating some new kind of element the
thing has to get bigger and the thing
has to get bigger because the
temperature required in order to fuse
these large and nuclei causes the gas to
expand that's how you just get bigger
and bigger and bigger red giants and so
they give them a special name red
supergiant right eventually even that
fuel source runs out the reason that
fuel source runs out is because you get
up to iron on the periodic table number
56 from memory and that number 56 you
can no longer have fusion taking place
which causes an exothermic reaction
instead the fusion of iron off the
fusion of things heavier than iron
requires energy and so the entire star
collapses because no new energy is being
produced just as it would be in a white
dwarf the reason why a white dwarf
doesn't collapse any further than what
it does is because you have Mack
some compression of normal matter so
atoms are but trussed up against atoms
as strongly as they possibly can be but
there is something stronger than the
inter atomic forces between atoms and
that force is gravity okay so given
enough mass you can have a gravity which
exceeds the structural integrity of the
atoms and then so the atoms themselves
will collapse and they will hit inside
one another and so that's what we're
about to see on the next slide which is
when atoms go inside of one another you
essentially what that means at the level
of the atom is that electrons go into
the nucleus and where do they go they go
into the protons electron plus proton is
Neutron and so any neutrons that are in
that nucleus to begin with well they
remain there
but now the protons turn into neutrons
and so all you have is a neutron at the
center of such a star and then the
neutrons are buttressed up against
neutrons and no further collapse takes
place unless you have an even more
massive star if you have an even more
massive star to begin with then you have
so many neutrons or buttressed up
against one another that even the mass
even that the structural integrity of
the neutrons is insufficient to prevent
further collapse and the neutrons start
to go inside of neutrons and at that
point you have this thing called a
singularity where everything goes inside
of everything else a point of high mass
in zero space so you have infinite
density because remember density equals
mass divided by volume so if you have
zero volume you're dividing by zero no
one's allowed to divide by zero except
for Chuck Norris or God or in this case
a black hole sorry I'm just sipping my
coffee umm a neutron turns into a pulsar
now why is this well as the thing
collapses the thing starts to spin
really really fast and that spinning is
what what stars give that radiation all
right and so all stars give out
radiation they give out radio waves that
give it x-ray
I give up all sorts of you know
electromagnetic frequencies and in the
case of a neutron star as the thing
collapses it tends to funnel it tends to
focus all of the radiation into two
beams and as the thing spins really
really really fast those beams sometimes
get directed towards the earth and we
can pick them up with radio telescopes
and so when these things were first
discovered and you can look up the
famous female astronomer Jocelyn Bell
for this and Jocelyn Bell was the first
one to discover this object called that
pulsar and so she pointed radio
telescopes at the sky and notice that
they were pulsations coming from certain
parts of the sky and the radio frequency
and so called them pulsars and later on
they were found to be signatures of
neutron stars so pulsars are neutron
stars and so far as we know all neutron
stars are pole styles as well if a star
is large enough it'll become a black
hole okay and so a black hole is of zero
size however although the black hole all
the mass is concentrated into a region
of zero size the gravitational field
around the black hole extends to this
point called the event horizon and we'll
talk about that later so the black hole
the hole itself is 0 but the region of
space around it where it's dangerous to
be is extends further than 0 so these
black holes have radiuses right they
have radii we'll talk about that another
time though all right so the important
thing for this lesson at the moment but
I just want to get across is that
there's this equilibrium between
radiation pressure and gravity so the
pressure out equals the gravity in that
has a name that's called hydrostatic
equilibrium and that's why stars are
spherical
that's why stars are stable that's why
stars don't just blow themselves up even
though they've got these hydrogen bombs
going off in the center and nor do they
collapse even though they are massive
and gravity's sucking them in this is
the last thing I'll do for now I think
I've talked for long enough little bit
shorter than I thought but I think you
can do a little bit of reading after
this
luminosity luminosity is how we measure
the total power output of a star okay so
it is one of the biggest measures that
we have or the one of the most precise
measures we have for determining the
differences between stars some stars put
out lots and lots of energy some stars
don't put out much energy so luminosity
is not like apparent brightness so when
you go in to the when you go outside at
night and look at the sky and you notice
that some stars are bright and some
stars are not bright
the brightest star that you'll see in
the sky is something called Sirius the
next brightest star is something called
Canopus and then X bright a star again
is something called Alpha Centauri well
actually to try to start that you see in
the skies the Sun right you might see it
at night of course by definition but the
point is that the Sun is extremely
bright but it's not very luminous
compared to other stars the only reason
it seems bright is because it's so close
to us and so this should indicate to you
the difference between something called
apparent brightness okay apparently how
bright is the star and something called
luminosity which is how much total
energy the thing is giving out and so
the Sun gives out a certain amount of
light in total and that appears a
certain brightness in the sky and so
this idea applies to every other star
that you see in the sky so the really
bright ones you see in the sky you don't
know just by looking whether or not they
are close and actually dim or a long way
off and actually really powerful really
really bright it's impossible to tell
just by looking in the sky at night you
need to have other ways of calibrating
exactly how bright those stars are now
the way that you do that is in part
based on the parallax method that we've
already talked about so seeing if the
stars move on the sky at all then you
can find a distance to them once you've
found a distance to them then you can
figure out okay well that star happens
to be
ten parsecs away and it also appears to
be this bright once you've got those two
things once you've got the actual
distance and the apparent brightness
then you can figure out the true
brightness or the luminosity okay anyway
for now luminosity is the same quantity
as power the same as what okay and so
power is work divided by time energy
divided by time also is luminosity
okay energy divided by time how much
energy an object in our case a star but
it could be a candle it could be a light
globe how much energy it's giving out
per per unit time per second
I can finally think okay I promise this
will be the final thing blackbody
radiation
here's a lovely picture of a metalworker
blacksmith is heated up some iron and is
now shaping it okay hit it up to red-hot
so the iron is all bendy and what we
notice is that it's changed color and it
goes red-hot now in common everyday
English we talk about things being
red-hot has been hottest in astronomy
you have to undo what you've learned
before and although you might think blue
is nice and cool and red is very hot
you've got to reverse that in your mind
now okay because from now on in
astronomy red is the cool one blue is
the bleeding hot one okay and so the
color scheme actually goes red orange
yellow getting hotter white and blue so
it's all the colors of the rainbow
except for green okay Green is a bit of
a mystery now I'll have to do a separate
lesson on why there are no green stars
okay it's complicated we have to
approach it from a few different
directions
and why does not actually a color of the
rainbow that there's a clue right what
should be Green actually appears kind of
white now why is that now are there
armed other violent stars or purple
stars well kind of sort it's just that
our eyes don't pick them up okay all
right
gonna be really sensitive in comparison
to blue and so a star that should appear
to be purple appears to us to be blue
yeah okay so we might have mentioned
this before when we did we did some
stuff on quantum theory and we might
have mentioned this and also stuff that
we did in thermal physics we might have
mentioned this this is called a black
body radiation curve and we're going to
get onto a law called Wiens law not
today
but it explains how and this is a
particularly poorly drawn graph and can
you spot the error okay I'll I'll leave
that as a question for you to answer but
those earth is a there's a misconception
here with this graph or a a poor choice
here for something you can think about
it but the point here is that on this
axis you have energy being put our total
energy being put out okay they're called
the energy density but total energy
being put out by an object and here we
have the wavelength so if the thing has
a really high temperature in comparison
it's like two thousand Kelvin okay which
isn't really that high but it's high
enough in comparison to let's say 1750
Kelvin or 1,250 Kelvin we notice a
couple of things that are different
between these objects I have three
objects here plotted one is two thousand
Kelvin one is 1750 Kelvin one one is
1250 Kelvin the graph that you get for
this one here for the highest
temperature one has a peak if we draw a
vertical line downwards so it intersects
with the x-axis we get a number that is
somewhere around about 1000 let's call
it 300 nanometers what does that mean it
means the peak radiation the the
wavelength that is being most frequent
most of the radiation is coming out
around 1300 nanometers so that's one
thing we can say about this graph
for the 1750 if we drop a vertical line
downwards it's no longer down here at
1300 it's a little bit further to the
right it's like I don't know 1500 and
for the 1250 it's a bit harder Patel but
let's call it somewhere over 2000
nanometers
what's the point of all that as the
temperature goes up for an object the
peak of the radiation has a shorter
wavelength shorter wavelength shorter
wavelength means higher frequency higher
energy so the difference between objects
with different temperatures is that the
peak wavelength of the radiation gets
shorter that's one difference between
each of the graphs and the other
difference between each of the graphs is
that the total amount of energy between
objects we've hired compared if we
compare objects of higher temperatures
or objects of lower temperature the
objects of higher temperature put out
far more energy overall so it's putting
out more energy at every single
wavelength this one here of two thousand
Kelvin this one here of 1700 D Kelvin is
putting out less energy at every single
wavelength what are the problems with
these graphs okay that was my question I
was living with what's a blackbody a
blackbody is just anything that emits
all the radiation that that it absorbs
okay that might be another question I'll
leave you with so that's where I'll stop
for now I've written a few questions
okay one of which let's just answer is
what's the problem in this graph another
of which is look up what a blackbody is
and write down a definition for a
blackbody and I'll write a few other
questions for you to complete for this
lesson as well and see you next time